<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 32: They Enter the Pyramid</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-32" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">They Enter the Pyramid</span>
			</h2>
			<p>Pekuah descended to the tents, and the rest entered the Pyramid.  They passed through the galleries, surveyed the vaults of marble, and examined the chest in which the body of the founder is supposed to have been deposited.  They then sat down in one of the most spacious chambers to rest awhile before they attempted to return.</p>
			<p>“We have now,” said Imlac, “gratified our minds with an exact view of the greatest work of man, except the wall of China.</p>
			<p>“Of the wall it is very easy to assign the motive.  It secured a wealthy and timorous nation from the incursions of barbarians, whose unskilfulness in the arts made it easier for them to supply their wants by rapine than by industry, and who from time to time poured in upon the inhabitants of peaceful commerce as vultures descend upon domestic fowl.  Their celerity and fierceness made the wall necessary, and their ignorance made it efficacious.</p>
			<p>“But for the Pyramids, no reason has ever been given adequate to the cost and labour of the work.  The narrowness of the chambers proves that it could afford no retreat from enemies, and treasures might have been reposited at far less expense with equal security.  It seems to have been erected only in compliance with that hunger of imagination which preys incessantly upon life, and must be always appeased by some employment.  Those who have already all that they can enjoy must enlarge their desires.  He that has built for use till use is supplied must begin to build for vanity, and extend his plan to the utmost power of human performance that he may not be soon reduced to form another wish.</p>
			<p>“I consider this mighty structure as a monument of the insufficiency of human enjoyments.  A king whose power is unlimited, and whose treasures surmount all real and imaginary wants, is compelled to solace, by the erection of a pyramid, the satiety of dominion and tastelessness of pleasures, and to amuse the tediousness of declining life by seeing thousands labouring without end, and one stone, for no purpose, laid upon another.  Whoever thou art that, not content with a moderate condition, imaginest happiness in royal magnificence, and dreamest that command or riches can feed the appetite of novelty with perpetual gratifications, survey the Pyramids, and confess thy folly!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
