<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12: The Story of Imlac (Continued)</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Story of Imlac (Continued)</span>
			</h2>
			<p>“I am not willing,” said the Prince, “to suppose that happiness is so parsimoniously distributed to mortals, nor can I believe but that, if I had the choice of life, I should be able to fill every day with pleasure.  I would injure no man, and should provoke no resentments; I would relieve every distress, and should enjoy the benedictions of gratitude.  I would choose my friends among the wise and my wife among the virtuous, and therefore should be in no danger from treachery or unkindness.  My children should by my care be learned and pious, and would repay to my age what their childhood had received.  What would dare to molest him who might call on every side to thousands enriched by his bounty or assisted by his power?  And why should not life glide away in the soft reciprocation of protection and reverence?  All this may be done without the help of European refinements, which appear by their effects to be rather specious than useful.  Let us leave them and pursue our journey.”</p>
			<p>“From Palestine,” said Imlac, “I passed through many regions of Asia; in the more civilised kingdoms as a trader, and among the barbarians of the mountains as a pilgrim.  At last I began to long for my native country, that I might repose after my travels and fatigues in the places where I had spent my earliest years, and gladden my old companions with the recital of my adventures.  Often did I figure to myself those with whom I had sported away the gay hours of dawning life, sitting round me in its evening, wondering at my tales and listening to my counsels.</p>
			<p>“When this thought had taken possession of my mind, I considered every moment as wasted which did not bring me nearer to Abyssinia.  I hastened into Egypt, and, notwithstanding my impatience, was detained ten months in the contemplation of its ancient magnificence and in inquiries after the remains of its ancient learning.  I found in Cairo a mixture of all nations: some brought thither by the love of knowledge, some by the hope of gain; many by the desire of living after their own manner without observation, and of lying hid in the obscurity of multitudes; for in a city populous as Cairo it is possible to obtain at the same time the gratifications of society and the secrecy of solitude.</p>
			<p>“From Cairo I travelled to Suez, and embarked on the Red Sea, passing along the coast till I arrived at the port from which I had departed twenty years before.  Here I joined myself to a caravan, and re-entered my native country.</p>
			<p>“I now expected the caresses of my kinsmen and the congratulations of my friends, and was not without hope that my father, whatever value he had set upon riches, would own with gladness and pride a son who was able to add to the felicity and honour of the nation.  But I was soon convinced that my thoughts were vain.  My father had been dead fourteen years, having divided his wealth among my brothers, who were removed to some other provinces.  Of my companions, the greater part was in the grave; of the rest, some could with difficulty remember me, and some considered me as one corrupted by foreign manners.</p>
			<p>“A man used to vicissitudes is not easily dejected.  I forgot, after a time, my disappointment, and endeavoured to recommend myself to the nobles of the kingdom; they admitted me to their tables, heard my story, and dismissed me.  I opened a school, and was prohibited to teach.  I then resolved to sit down in the quiet of domestic life, and addressed a lady that was fond of my conversation, but rejected my suit because my father was a merchant.</p>
			<p>“Wearied at last with solicitation and repulses, I resolved to hide myself for ever from the world, and depend no longer on the opinion or caprice of others.  I waited for the time when the gate of the Happy Valley should open, that I might bid farewell to hope and fear; the day came, my performance was distinguished with favour, and I resigned myself with joy to perpetual confinement.”</p>
			<p>“Hast thou here found happiness at last?” said Rasselas.  “Tell me, without reserve, art thou content with thy condition, or dost thou wish to be again wandering and inquiring?  All the inhabitants of this valley celebrate their lot, and at the annual visit of the Emperor invite others to partake of their felicity.”</p>
			<p>“Great Prince,” said Imlac, “I shall speak the truth.  I know not one of all your attendants who does not lament the hour when he entered this retreat.  I am less unhappy than the rest, because I have a mind replete with images, which I can vary and combine at pleasure.  I can amuse my solitude by the renovation of the knowledge which begins to fade from my memory, and by recollection of the accidents of my past life.  Yet all this ends in the sorrowful consideration that my acquirements are now useless, and that none of my pleasures can be again enjoyed.  The rest, whose minds have no impression but of the present moment, are either corroded by malignant passions or sit stupid in the gloom of perpetual vacancy.”</p>
			<p>“What passions can infest those,” said the Prince, “who have no rivals?  We are in a place where impotence precludes malice, and where all envy is repressed by community of enjoyments.”</p>
			<p>“There may be community,” said Imlac, “of material possessions, but there can never be community of love or of esteem.  It must happen that one will please more than another; he that knows himself despised will always be envious, and still more envious and malevolent if he is condemned to live in the presence of those who despise him.  The invitations by which they allure others to a state which they feel to be wretched, proceed from the natural malignity of hopeless misery.  They are weary of themselves and of each other, and expect to find relief in new companions.  They envy the liberty which their folly has forfeited, and would gladly see all mankind imprisoned like themselves.</p>
			<p>“From this crime, however, I am wholly free.  No man can say that he is wretched by my persuasion.  I look with pity on the crowds who are annually soliciting admission to captivity, and wish that it were lawful for me to warn them of their danger.”</p>
			<p>“My dear Imlac,” said the Prince, “I will open to thee my whole heart.  I have long meditated an escape from the Happy Valley.  I have examined the mountain on every side, but find myself insuperably barred⁠—teach me the way to break my prison; thou shalt be the companion of my flight, the guide of my rambles, the partner of my fortune, and my sole director in the <i>choice of life</i>.</p>
			<p>“Sir,” answered the poet, “your escape will be difficult, and perhaps you may soon repent your curiosity.  The world, which you figure to yourself smooth and quiet as the lake in the valley, you will find a sea foaming with tempests and boiling with whirlpools; you will be sometimes overwhelmed by the waves of violence, and sometimes dashed against the rocks of treachery.  Amidst wrongs and frauds, competitions and anxieties, you will wish a thousand times for these seats of quiet, and willingly quit hope to be free from fear.”</p>
			<p>“Do not seek to deter me from my purpose,” said the Prince.  “I am impatient to see what thou hast seen; and since thou art thyself weary of the valley, it is evident that thy former state was better than this.  Whatever be the consequence of my experiment, I am resolved to judge with mine own eyes of the various conditions of men, and then to make deliberately my <i>choice of life</i>.”</p>
			<p>“I am afraid,” said Imlac, “you are hindered by stronger restraints than my persuasions; yet, if your determination is fixed, I do not counsel you to despair.  Few things are impossible to diligence and skill.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
