<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 42: The Opinion of the Astronomer Is Explained and Justified</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-42" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle">The Opinion of the Astronomer Is Explained and Justified</span>
			</h2>
			<p>“I suppose he discovered in me, through the obscurity of the room, some tokens of amazement and doubt, for after a short pause he proceeded thus:⁠—</p>
			<p>“ ‘Not to be easily credited will neither surprise nor offend me, for I am probably the first of human beings to whom this trust has been imparted.  Nor do I know whether to deem this distinction a reward or punishment.  Since I have possessed it I have been far less happy than before, and nothing but the consciousness of good intention could have enabled me to support the weariness of unremitted vigilance.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘How long, sir,’ said I, ‘has this great office been in your hands?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘About ten years ago,’ said he, ‘my daily observations of the changes of the sky led me to consider whether, if I had the power of the seasons, I could confer greater plenty upon the inhabitants of the earth.  This contemplation fastened on my mind, and I sat days and nights in imaginary dominion, pouring upon this country and that the showers of fertility, and seconding every fall of rain with a due proportion of sunshine.  I had yet only the will to do good, and did not imagine that I should ever have the power.</p>
			<p>“ ‘One day as I was looking on the fields withering with heat, I felt in my mind a sudden wish that I could send rain on the southern mountains, and raise the Nile to an inundation.  In the hurry of my imagination I commanded rain to fall; and by comparing the time of my command with that of the inundation, I found that the clouds had listened to my lips.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Might not some other cause,’ said I, ‘produce this concurrence?  The Nile does not always rise on the same day.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Do not believe,’ said he, with impatience, ‘that such objections could escape me.  I reasoned long against my own conviction, and laboured against truth with the utmost obstinacy.  I sometimes suspected myself of madness, and should not have dared to impart this secret but to a man like you, capable of distinguishing the wonderful from the impossible, and the incredible from the false.’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Why, sir,’ said I, ‘do you call that incredible which you know, or think you know, to be true?’</p>
			<p>“ ‘Because,’ said he, ‘I cannot prove it by any external evidence; and I know too well the laws of demonstration to think that my conviction ought to influence another, who cannot, like me, be conscious of its force.  I therefore shall not attempt to gain credit by disputation.  It is sufficient that I feel this power that I have long possessed, and every day exerted it.  But the life of man is short; the infirmities of age increase upon me, and the time will soon come when the regulator of the year must mingle with the dust.  The care of appointing a successor has long disturbed me; the night and the day have been spent in comparisons of all the characters which have come to my knowledge, and I have yet found none so worthy as thyself.’ ”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
