<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 28</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
				<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>
				<span epub:type="subtitle"> RASSELAS AND NEKAYAH CONTINUE THEIR CONVERSATION</span>
			</h2>
			<p>“<span class="smcap">Dear</span> Princess,” said Rasselas, “you fall into the common errors of exaggeratory declamation, by producing in a familiar disquisition examples of national calamities and scenes of extensive misery which are found in books rather than in the world, and which, as they are horrid, are ordained to be rare.  Let us not imagine evils which we do not feel, nor injure life by misrepresentations.  I cannot bear that querulous eloquence which threatens every city with a siege like that of Jerusalem, that makes famine attend on every flight of locust, and suspends pestilence on the wing of every blast that issues from the south.</p>
			<p>“On necessary and inevitable evils which overwhelm kingdoms at once all disputation is vain; when they happen they must be endured.  But it is evident that these bursts of universal distress are more dreaded than felt; thousands and tens of thousands flourish in youth and wither in age, without the knowledge of any other than domestic evils, and share the same pleasures and vexations, whether their kings are mild or cruel, whether the armies of their country pursue their enemies or retreat before them.  While Courts are disturbed with intestine competitions and ambassadors are negotiating in foreign countries, the smith still plies his anvil and the husbandman drives his plough forward; the necessaries of life are required and obtained, and the successive business of the season continues to make its wonted revolutions.</p>
			<p>“Let us cease to consider what perhaps may never happen, and what, when it shall happen, will laugh at human speculation.  We will not endeavour to modify the motions of the elements or to fix the destiny of kingdoms.  It is our business to consider what beings like us may perform, each labouring for his own happiness by promoting within his circle, however narrow, the happiness of others.</p>
			<p>“Marriage is evidently the dictate of Nature; men and women were made to be the companions of each other, and therefore I cannot be persuaded but that marriage is one of the means of happiness.”</p>
			<p>“I know not,” said the Princess, “whether marriage be more than one of the innumerable modes of human misery.  When I see and reckon the various forms of connubial infelicity, the unexpected causes of lasting discord, the diversities of temper, the oppositions of opinion, the rude collisions of contrary desire where both are urged by violent impulses, the obstinate contest of disagreeing virtues where both are supported by consciousness of good intention, I am sometimes disposed to think, with the severer casuists of most nations, that marriage is rather permitted than approved, and that none, but by the instigation of a passion too much indulged, entangle themselves with indissoluble compact.”</p>
			<p>“You seem to forget,” replied Rasselas, “that you have, even now represented celibacy as less happy than marriage.  Both conditions may be bad, but they cannot both be worse.  Thus it happens, when wrong opinions are entertained, that they mutually destroy each other and leave the mind open to truth.”</p>
			<p>“I did not expect,” answered, the Princess, “to hear that imputed to falsehood which is the consequence only of frailty.  To the mind, as to the eye, it is difficult to compare with exactness objects vast in their extent and various in their parts.  When we see or conceive the whole at once, we readily note the discriminations and decide the preference, but of two systems, of which neither can be surveyed by any human being in its full compass of magnitude and multiplicity of complication, where is the wonder that, judging of the whole by parts, I am alternately affected by one and the other as either presses on my memory or fancy?  We differ from ourselves just as we differ from each other when we see only part of the question, as in the multifarious relations of politics and morality, but when we perceive the whole at once, as in numerical computations, all agree in one judgment, and none ever varies in his opinion.”</p>
			<p>“Let us not add,” said the Prince, “to the other evils of life the bitterness of controversy, nor endeavour to vie with each other in subtilties of argument.  We are employed in a search of which both are equally to enjoy the success or suffer by the miscarriage; it is therefore fit that we assist each other.  You surely conclude too hastily from the infelicity of marriage against its institution; will not the misery of life prove equally that life cannot be the gift of Heaven?  The world must be peopled by marriage or peopled without it.”</p>
			<p>“How the world is to be peopled,” returned Nekayah, “is not my care and need not be yours.  I see no danger that the present generation should omit to leave successors behind them; we are not now inquiring for the world, but for ourselves.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
